Greetings followers.
And settle in.
Because I'm about to share
with you a true story
about one of the most
zealous cults in the world.
The story takes place
on the group's holiest day.
Acolytes arrived at dawn,
some having crossed oceans
and sacrificed life savings
in order to get there.
They came bearing
hand-beaded offerings
inscribed with sacred numbers: 22, 13, 89.
But this, my friends,
is not the story of an apocalyptic sect
on a faraway compound.
No, this was a Taylor Swift concert.
(Laughter)
I said it.
The talismans are friendship bracelets,
the biblical books are known as eras,
and the charismatic leader
is a billionaire pop priestess
who, let's be honest,
could probably rule the free world
if she really wanted to.
Now, don't get me wrong.
I'm a deep-dyed "Red" album girlie.
I'm not here to call out
Swifties as cult followers.
No, I wouldn't dare.
But I'm an author
and a cultural commentator
with a background in linguistics.
And I’m here to share how we’re all
susceptible to cult-ish thinking,
for better and for worse.
And our everyday vocabularies
are evidence of our devotion.
I'm here to share
what to pay attention to,
what to listen for,
so that, as we move through these
inevitably culty times,
we can stay both enchanted and empowered.
Now, my fascination
with cults is personal.
That's because of my dad.
As a teenager, he was forced
to join Synanon,
a '70s California compound
with matching overalls
and a traumatizing truth-telling
ritual called The Game.
But my dad escaped,
became a neuroscientist,
and brought up a nosy kid
who became obsessed with understanding
how to identify cultish influence
in everyday life.
As I got older, I couldn't help but notice
that the same language tactics
that my dad described in Synanon
could be found kind of everywhere.
Like, in my high school theater program
and in the wellness industry
and on my social media feed.
That's how I came to study
the cultish spectrum,
degrees of influence,
none of which start out
with LSD and robes,
but instead, sneakily, with words.
I want to point out three
cultish language tactics
to listen for in everyday life.
The first is called
the thought-terminating cliche.
Coined in 1961 by the psychiatrist
Robert Jay Lifton,
thought-terminating cliches
are zingy stack expressions
that are easy to memorize, easy to repeat
and aimed at shutting down
independent thinking and questioning.
So let's say you're a member of a group,
and there's a rule
that you want to push back against.
You might get hit with a phrase
like, "trust the process,"
or "it's all in God's plan"
to shut you down.
In Synanon, the phrase "act as if"
effectively meant pretend
that you believe until you do.
Today, in conspiracy theory-type groups,
the phrase “do your research” basically
means “stop asking me about mine.”
(Laughter)
Next, I want to talk
about "us" versus "them" labels.
In Synanon, defectors
were called "splitees."
Today, you’ve got your “sheeple,”
your “NPCs,” your “industry plants.”
When a label makes all of those people
seem unilaterally evil and us superior,
that's a red flag.
And thirdly, I want
to mention loaded language.
Corporate synergistic visionaries.
Wellness 5D consciousness.
At first, emotionally charged buzzwords
like this feel like enlightenment.
Then one day you wake up
and you realize you've completely
surrendered your ability to talk and think
for yourself.
This language works because it plugs
straight into our cognitive biases.
These deeply ingrained
decision-making shortcuts
that developed in earlier human brains
to help us process information
from the world around us
enough to survive it.
But today, mental magic tricks like
confirmation bias, the sunk cost fallacy,
and the halo effect
cause us to believe only the information
we already agree with,
double down on sketchy choices
and worship mortal human beings
we've never even met
as all-knowing deities.
This clash between our
once useful cognitive biases
and the information age
is this phenomenon that I've been calling
magical overthinking.
And it's a problem
because studies show that social media
has damaged our mental health
and our attention spans,
all the while making
cultish leaders mega accessible.
Who needs compounds
when you have comment sections?
Now, I don't say this to freak anyone out.
I'm just here to point out the difference
between awe and indoctrination.
And I want to leave us
with a few tips to help us do that.
First of all,
when you find yourself
in a space, even a digital one,
where you feel really
emotionally activated
and you're using a lot of buzzwords
that make you feel
like you're part of a tribe,
but you can't really define
exactly what you're saying
in plain English, or why,
that's a sign to take a step back
and consult other sources.
Next, pay attention to exit costs.
Healthy groups might make
leaving feel awkward,
but never apocalyptic or earth-shattering.
And finally, we can use
cult language for good.
Rousing chants, rhyming mantras,
they can be used to make
true information catchy, too.
I'm not here to take away
anyone's friendship bracelets.
We need community more now than ever.
So I think living
in this cultiest era of all time,
the goal is not so much to be cult-proof,
it's to be cult-literate.
You follow?
(Laughter)
Thank you.
(Applause)